Lets-Plot for Kotlin docs (#4426)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/data-analysis/lets-plot.md

[//]: # (title: Data visualization with Lets-Plot for Kotlin)

> [Lets-Plot for Kotlin (LPK)](https://lets-plot.org/kotlin/get-started.html) is a multiplatform plotting library that serves as a port of [R's ggplot2 library](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/) to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Lets-Plot for Kotlin (LPK)](https://lets-plot.org/kotlin/get-started.html) is a multiplatform plotting library that ports the [R's ggplot2 library](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/) to
```

Kotlin. LPK brings the feature-rich ggplot2 API to the Kotlin ecosystem,

> making it suited for scientists and statisticians who require sophisticated data visualization capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
making it suitable for scientists and statisticians who require sophisticated data visualization capabilities.
```

> LPK targets various platforms, including [Kotlin notebooks](data-analysis-overview.md#notebooks), [Kotlin/JS](js-overview.md), Kotlin [JVM Swing](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/swing/), [JavaFX](https://openjfx.io/), and [Kotlin Compose Multiplatform](https://www.jetbrains.com/lp/compose-multiplatform/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LPK targets various platforms, including [Kotlin notebooks](data-analysis-overview.md#notebooks), [Kotlin/JS](js-overview.md), [JVM's Swing](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/swing/), [JavaFX](https://openjfx.io/), and [Compose Multiplatform](https://www.jetbrains.com/lp/compose-multiplatform/).
```

Reviewer: > including [Kotlin notebooks](data-analysis-overview.md#notebooks)

Does it mean the Kotlin Notebook library or all of the notebook solutions? (Kotlin Notebook, Datalore, Kotlin-Jupyter Notebook)

Reviewer 2: > > including [Kotlin notebooks](data-analysis-overview.md#notebooks)
> 
> Does it mean the Kotlin Notebook library or all of the notebook solutions? (Kotlin Notebook, Datalore, Kotlin-Jupyter Notebook)

It's the latter.

Reviewer: Then maybe we should list all of them. Or remove Datalore from the next sentence since it's already a part of the Kotlin family of notebook solutions

Reviewer 2: My understanding is that the sentence below hints at 'no code' visualization capabilities in these products. It's sort of like what's shown in this blog (watch video under "There are many available visualization options,") : https://blog.jetbrains.com/pycharm/2024/09/how-to-use-jupyter-notebooks-in-pycharm/

Author: Yes, it's Kotlin notebooks (including Kotlin Notebook, Datalore, Kotlin-Jupyter Notebook), that's why from here we're linking to where this list of solutions is explained. As a side note, it was agreed with MKT that "Kotlin notebooks" refers to notebook clients working with Kotlin, whereas "Kotlin Notebook" refers to the Kotlin Notebook plugin, or to the Kotlin Notebook file generated with the plugin.

Additionally, LPK has seamless integration with [IntelliJ](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/), [DataGrip](https://www.jetbrains.com/datagrip/), [Datalore](https://datalore.jetbrains.com), [DataSpell](https://www.jetbrains.com/dataspell/), and [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/).

![Lets-Plot](lets-plot-overview.png){width=700}

This tutorial demonstrates how to create different plot types with

> the LPK and [Kotlin DataFrame](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/gettingstarted.html) libraries, using Kotlin Notebook in IntelliJ IDEA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the LPK and [Kotlin DataFrame](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/gettingstarted.html) libraries using Kotlin Notebook in IntelliJ IDEA.
```

## Before you start

1. Download and install the latest version of [IntelliJ IDEA Ultimate](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/?section=mac).
2. Install the [Kotlin Notebook plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/16340-kotlin-notebook) in IntelliJ IDEA.

   > Alternatively, access the Kotlin Notebook plugin from **Settings** | **Plugins** | **Marketplace** within IntelliJ IDEA.
   >
   {type="tip"}

3. Create a new notebook by selecting **File** | **New** | **Kotlin Notebook**.
4. In your notebook, import the LPK and Kotlin DataFrame libraries by running the following command:

    ```kotlin
    %use lets-plot
    %use dataframe
    ```

## Prepare the data

> Create a DataFrame that stores simulated numbers of the monthly average temperature in three cities: Berlin, Madrid, and Caracas.

Reviewer: I personally find it strange to have a data frame instance capitalized like it's a product name, but I see that the same approach is used on the Data analysis visualization page. So this questions is broader that this PR and can be resolved separately

Author: Yes, this was something I had talked with @daniCsorbaJB about, and the dev team requested him to manage it like this. We can discuss further.

> Create a DataFrame that stores simulated numbers of the monthly average temperature in three cities: Berlin, Madrid, and Caracas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's create a DataFrame that stores simulated numbers of the monthly average temperature in three cities: Berlin, Madrid, and Caracas.
```

Use the `dataFrameOf()` function from the Kotlin DataFrame library to generate the DataFrame. Paste and run the following code snippet in your Kotlin Notebook:

```kotlin

> // The months variable stores a list with the 12 months of the year

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The months variable stores a list with 12 months of the year
```

val months = listOf(
    "January", "February",
    "March", "April", "May",
    "June", "July", "August",
    "September", "October", "November",
    "December"
)
// The tempBerlin, tempMadrid, and tempCaracas variables store a list with temperature values for each month
val tempBerlin =
    listOf(-0.5, 0.0, 4.8, 9.0, 14.3, 17.5, 19.2, 18.9, 14.5, 9.7, 4.7, 1.0)
val tempMadrid =
    listOf(6.3, 7.9, 11.2, 12.9, 16.7, 21.1, 24.7, 24.2, 20.3, 15.4, 9.9, 6.6)
val tempCaracas =
    listOf(27.5, 28.9, 29.6, 30.9, 31.7, 35.1, 33.8, 32.2, 31.3, 29.4, 28.9, 27.6)

> // The df variable stores a DataFrame of three columns, including records of months, temperature, and cities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The df variable stores a DataFrame of three columns, including monthly records, temperature, and cities
```

val df = dataFrameOf(
    "Month" to months + months + months,
    "Temperature" to tempBerlin + tempMadrid + tempCaracas,
    "City" to List(12) { "Berlin" } + List(12) { "Madrid" } + List(12) { "Caracas" }
)
df.head(4)
```

You can see that the DataFrame has three columns: Month, Temperature, and City. The first four rows of the DataFrame
contain records of the temperature in Berlin from January to April:

![Dataframe exploration](visualization-dataframe-temperature.png){width=600}

To create a plot using the LPK library, you need to convert your data (`df`) into a `Map` type that stores the
data in key-value pairs. You can easily convert a DataFrame into a `Map` using the `.toMap()` function:

```kotlin
val data = df.toMap()
```

## Create a scatter plot

Let's create a scatter plot in Kotlin Notebook with the LPK library. 

Once you have your data in the `Map` format, use the `letsPlot()` function from the LPK library to generate the scatter plot. 

> You can specify the values for the X and Y axes, as well as define categories with colors. Additionally, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify the values for the X and Y axes, as well as define color categories. Additionally, 
```

Author: I'll leave it as "categories and their color" because we need to emphasize categories generation (being these categorical values for the X and Y access), plus their colors.

you can [customize](https://lets-plot.org/kotlin/aesthetics.html#point-shapes) the plot's size and point shapes to suit your needs:

```kotlin

> // Specifies X and Y axes, categories with colors, plot size, and plot type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Specifies X and Y axes, color categories, plot size, and plot type
```

val scatterPlot =
    letsPlot(data) { x = "Month"; y = "Temperature"; color = "City" } + ggsize(600, 500) + geomPoint(shape = 15)
scatterPlot
```

Here's the result:

![Scatter plot](lets-plot-scatter.svg){width=600}

## Create a box plot

Let's visualize the [data](#prepare-the-data) in a box plot. Use the `boxPlot()` function from the LPK library to generate the plot and [customize](https://lets-plot.org/kotlin/aesthetics.html#point-shapes) colors with the `scaleFillManual()`
function:

```kotlin
// Specifies X and Y axes, categories, plot size, and plot type
val boxPlot = ggplot(data) { x = "City"; y = "Temperature" } + ggsize(700, 500) + geomBoxplot { fill = "City" } +

>         // Customizes colors

Reviewer: I think the code indentation is too big here

        scaleFillManual(values = listOf("light_yellow", "light_magenta", "light_green"))
boxPlot
```

Here's the result:

![Box plot](box-plot.svg){width=600}

## Create a 2D density plot

Now, let's create a 2D density plot to visualize the distribution and concentration of some random data.

> ### Prepare the data for the  2D density plot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prepare the data for the 2D density plot
```

> ### Prepare the data for the  2D density plot

Reviewer: I think this particular section has enough steps to be a number list, for example:

1. Import dependencies to process the data...
2. Prepare the data for your plot...
3. Convert your data into a `Map` type...

Start by importing the dependencies to process the data and generate the plot:

```kotlin
%use lets-plot

@file:DependsOn("org.apache.commons:commons-math3:3.6.1")
import org.apache.commons.math3.distribution.MultivariateNormalDistribution
```

> > For more information about importing dependencies to Kotlin Notebook, see the [Kotlin Notebook features' documentation](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/kotlin-notebook.html#add-dependencies).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For more information about importing dependencies to Kotlin Notebook, see the [Kotlin Notebook documentation](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/kotlin-notebook.html#add-dependencies).
```

Reviewer: I think we can drop it since the text in IDEA's docs is about dependencies, not the library's features

> {type="tip"}

Prepare the data for your plot. Paste and run the following code snippet in your Kotlin Notebook to create sets of 2D data points:

```kotlin
// Defines covariance matrices for three distributions
val cov0: Array<DoubleArray> = arrayOf(
    doubleArrayOf(1.0, -.8),
    doubleArrayOf(-.8, 1.0)
)

val cov1: Array<DoubleArray> = arrayOf(
    doubleArrayOf(1.0, .8),
    doubleArrayOf(.8, 1.0)
)

val cov2: Array<DoubleArray> = arrayOf(
    doubleArrayOf(10.0, .1),
    doubleArrayOf(.1, .1)
)

// Defines the number of samples
val n = 400

// Defines means for three distributions
val means0: DoubleArray = doubleArrayOf(-2.0, 0.0)
val means1: DoubleArray = doubleArrayOf(2.0, 0.0)
val means2: DoubleArray = doubleArrayOf(0.0, 1.0)

> //  Generates random samples from three multivariate normal distributions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Generates random samples from three multivariate normal distributions
```
